DOCS-908: Document part 1 of the cloud app API and move robot API (#1706)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/program/apis/cloud.md

---
title: "Accessing the Cloud with Viam's Client SDKs"
linkTitle: "Cloud Management"
weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How to use the cloud API with Viam's client SDKs."
tags: ["cloud", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "cloud management"]
---

The cloud app API allows you to [manage your robot fleet](/manage/fleet/) with code instead of through the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Functionality includes:

- create and manage organizations, locations, and individual robots
- manage permissions and authorization
- create and manage fragments

{{% alert title="Support Notice" color="note" %}}

As of August 24, 2023, the cloud app API is only available in Python.

{{% /alert %}}

## API

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

To use the Viam cloud app API, you need to instantiate a [`ViamClient`](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/viam_client/index.html#viam.app.viam_client.ViamClient) and then instantiate an [`AppClient`](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/app_client/index.html#viam.app.app_client.AppClient):

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

> from viam.app.viam_client import ViamClient

Author: ```suggestion
from viam.rpc.dial import DialOptions, Credentials
from viam.app.viam_client import ViamClient
```

> from viam.app.app_client import AppClient

Author: ```suggestion
```

---

> title: "Managing Your Fleet with Viam's Cloud API"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Manage Your Fleet with Viam's Cloud API"
```
Imperative mood - speak to the user!

Author: true my bad

> title: "Accessing the Cloud with Viam's Client SDKs"

Reviewer 2: What is accessing the cloud?  Maybe instead consider:
```suggestion
title: "Managing your fleet with Viam's cloud API"
```

Author: Good point!
```suggestion
title: "Managing Your Fleet with Viam's Cloud API"
```

linkTitle: "Cloud Management"
weight: 20
type: "docs"

> description: "How to use the cloud API with Viam's client SDKs."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Use the cloud app API with Viam's client SDKs to manage your robot fleet with code."
```
^ this conveys the why - we should try to avoid starting descriptions with interrogative words

tags: ["cloud", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "cloud management"]
---

> The cloud app API allows you to [manage your robot fleet](/manage/fleet/) with code instead of through the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).

Reviewer 3: I think this is slightly misleading because if I understand correctly it is still through the app api regardless, we're just abstracting it to an interface or not. You could say something only slightly different: 
```suggestion
Use the cloud app API [manage your robot fleet](/manage/fleet/) with code instead of in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
```

Author: Mmm good point; this could be made more clear. How about this:
```suggestion
The cloud app API allows you to [manage your robot fleet](/manage/fleet/) with code instead of with the graphical interface of the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
```

Reviewer 3: I don't think we reaslly need to spell out GUI but that look good!

Author: I initially didn't think we did but I think this makes it more explicit what we mean? Since "in" vs "through" isn't that explicit

> Functionality includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With it you can
```

The items do not list functionality (which would be "creation and management of...", "management of permissions and authorization"...) - they list what you can do as a user - which is good - let's just change the beginning of the sentence.

- create and manage organizations, locations, and individual robots
- manage permissions and authorization
- create and manage fragments

{{% alert title="Support Notice" color="note" %}}

> As of August 24, 2023, the cloud app API is only available in Python.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of August 24, 2023, cloud app API methods are only available in the Python SDK.
```

Reviewer 4: Oops, you and Sierra sorted this one already!

> As of August 24, 2023, cloud app API methods are only available in the Python SDK.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cloud app API methods are only available in the Python SDK.
```
I think we have mostly been having these notices be like this in the past few months so that we don't have a glaring "THIS PAGE IS OUT OF DATE AND WE DON'T UPDATE OUR DOCS" if it gets outta sync 🤣 I'm fine w it either way though

{{% /alert %}}

## API

> {{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

Reviewer 4: Yes! That looks like just what we need here!!

> {{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

Author: I'd done it as a tip initially because it is different so didn't want it to look as though it wasn't different, but I think it'll work! will do

> {{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

Author: Oh also I may have looked and seen this as a tip: https://docs.viam.com/services/vision/#api

> {{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

Reviewer 4: Ooh I could see that tip having a similar problem there as well: skippable! Anyways, definitely out of scope for this PR!

> {{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

Author: Indeed, and on many other service pages as well! Though personally I think the tips are so colorful and eye-catching that it might be ok esp if we changed them to important or something. But indeed a problem for another PR!

See the following example for reference.

> You can find the location secret and the URL of your robot on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/):

Author: @andf-viam Okay what do you think of this section instead of the tip it was in before? And for this specific sentence, do you know if there's more specific info we can provide WRT where to find the URL and location secret? Do they have to go through the app for that?

Reviewer 4: Looks great! I like your `object (named cloud)` clarification too!

For the address and locations I've been using something like [this](https://github.com/viamrobotics/docs/blob/9cb22785541bf49bcfee8b998b74b71b971f1122/docs/extend/modular-resources/examples/tflite-module.md?plain=1#L259-L262). This is a bit clunky for now, but will be changing with the upcoming org-level API keys coming down the pipeline.

Author: ```suggestion
You can find the location secret and the URL of your robot on the **Code sample** tab in [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/):
```
Okay I think I want to keep this section somewhat streamlined since this page is probably for not-the-most-entry-level users anyway, and it's an aside to point them in the right direction versus a full-on tute. Is this enough?

Reviewer 4: Sure, I'm OK with that for this usage! 👍

Reviewer 4: EDIT: edited my above comment, think we need one more tweak!

> You can find the location secret and the URL of your robot on the **Code sample** tab in [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/):

Reviewer: can we link to the docs for the code sample tab?

Author: ```suggestion
You can find the location secret and the URL of your robot on the [**Code sample**](https://docs.viam.com/manage/fleet/robots/#code-sample) tab in [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/):
```

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
from viam.rpc.dial import DialOptions, Credentials
from viam.app.viam_client import ViamClient

async def connect() -> ViamClient:
    dial_options = DialOptions(
        auth_entity='mrroboto.this_is_just_an_example.viam.cloud',  # The URL of your robot.
        credentials=Credentials(
            type='robot-location-secret',
            payload='YOUR ROBOT LOCATION SECRET' # The location secret of your robot
        )
    )
    return await ViamClient.create_from_dial_options(dial_options)

async def main():

  # Make a ViamClient
  viam_client = await connect()
  # Instantiate an AppClient called "cloud" to run the cloud app API methods on
  cloud = await viam_client.app_client()
```

> Once you have instantiated an `AppClient`, you can run methods against the `AppClient` object (named `cloud` in the examples) according to the examples for each method below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have instantiated an `AppClient`, you can run the following [API methods](#api) against the `AppClient` object (named `cloud` in the examples).
```

Reviewer: this sentence should probably just go under the API heading

Author: That'll make the API section not match the API sections for other docs. Do we care?

## API

> The cloud API supports the following methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cloud API supports the following methods (among [others](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/app_client/index.html#viam.app.app_client.AppClient)):
```

Then you can get rid of the bold face note

Author: Note also goes into the APIs page so I'll make this change there too.

{{< readfile "/static/include/services/apis/cloud.md" >}}

### ListOrganizations

List the organizations the user is an authorized user of.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

**Parameters:**

- None

**Returns:**

- [(List[viam.proto.app.Organization])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.Organization): A list of the organization or organizations of which the user is an authorized owner.

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
org_list = await cloud.list_organizations()
```

For more information, see the [Python SDK Docs](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/app_client/index.html#viam.app.app_client.AppClient.list_organizations).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### ListOrganizationMembers

> List the members and invites of the currently authenticated-to organization.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
List the members and invites of the organization that you are currently authenticated to.
```
Speak directive to the user-- sentence is bulkier than it needs to be

Author: Yeah--I was just using the verbiage from the Python SDK docs but you're right this is better. Changing.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

**Parameters:**

- None

**Returns:**

- [(Tuple[List[viam.proto.app.OrganizationMember]])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.OrganizationMember): A tuple containing to lists:
  - The first (`[0]`) is a list of organization members.
  - The second (`[1]`) is a list of organization invites.

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
member_list = await cloud.list_organization_members()
```

For more information, see the [Python SDK Docs](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/app_client/index.html#viam.app.app_client.AppClient.list_organization_members).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### GetOrganizationNamespaceAvailability

Check the availability of an organization namespace.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

**Parameters:**

- `public_namespace` [(string)](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#text-sequence-type-str): The organization namespace to check.
Namespaces can only contain lowercase alphanumeric and dash characters.

**Raises:**

> - GRPCError: An error is raised if an invalid namespace (for example, `""`) is provided.

Reviewer 3: Tense on this is a little weird and I think policy as-is to not have examples in commas but could be mistaken
```suggestion
- GRPCError: The error raised if an invalid namespace has been provided.
```
Then put example at the top bc this seems like method function right?

Author: This came directly from the python SDK docs. I don't think I understand.

Reviewer 3: I think we should change it to speak to the user is all! I'm just suggesting this change in tense, as I think the way that this was written was ok for the Python SDK docs but not ok for docs.viam.com. What's being returned is the actual error, as far as I understand, so I think our docs should reflect that.

Author: I guess I don't actually know the whole error message--I guess GRPCError should be put in backticks if it is indeed the literal error?

Author: ```suggestion
- `GRPCError`: This error is raised if an invalid namespace (for example, `""`) is provided.
```
Does this make sense?

Reviewer 3: yep that looks great!

**Returns:**

- [(bool)](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#bltin-boolean-values): `True` if the provided namespace is available.

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
available = await cloud.get_organization_namespace_availability(public_namespace="my-cool-organization")
```

For more information, see the [Python SDK Docs](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/app_client/index.html#viam.app.app_client.AppClient.get_organization_namespace_availability).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### UpdateOrganizationInviteAuthorizations

> Update the authorizations attached to an organization invite that has already been created.

Author: ```suggestion
Update (add or remove) the authorizations attached to an organization invite that has already been created.
If an invitation has only one authorization and you want to remove it, delete the invitation instead of using this method.
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

**Parameters:**

- `email` [(string)](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#text-sequence-type-str): Email of the user the invite was sent to.
- `add_authorization` [(Optional[List[viam.proto.app.Authorization]])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.Authorization): Optional list of authorizations to add to the invite.
- `remove_authorization` [(Optional[List[viam.proto.app.Authorization]])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.Authorization): Optional list of authorizations to remove from the invite.

**Raises:**

> - GRPCError: An error is raised if no authorizations are passed or if an invalid combination of authorizations is passed (for example, an authorization to remove when the invite only contains one authorization).

Reviewer 3: Again would move the example out here

Reviewer 3: Same thing as above-- if error is being raised/returned just describe the error in the directive tense for the user instead of describing it like this

Author: ```suggestion
- `GRPCError`: This error is raised if no authorizations are passed or if an invalid combination of authorizations is passed (for example, an authorization to remove when the invite only contains one authorization).
```
Is this better? Also I think the example could be helpful here?

Reviewer 3: I don't mean not having the example, just moving it out so that it's in the method description (line 140). Would suggest that so people can more easily see that functionality of this method

Author: Hmm I think it's good to keep it here but can add it to the description as well--what do you think of my new suggestion on 140?

Reviewer 3: LGTM!

**Returns:**

- [(OrganizationInvite)](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.OrganizationInvite): The updated invitation.

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
update_invite = await cloud.update_organization_invite_authorizations(
    email="notarealemail@viam.com",
    remove_authorization=[
        authorization_type="some type of auth",
        authorization_id="identifier",
        resource_type="abc",
        resource_id="resource-identifier123",
        identity_id="id12345",
        organization_id="org_id_123"
    ]
)
```

For more information, see the [Python SDK Docs](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/app_client/index.html#viam.app.app_client.AppClient.update_organization_invite_authorizations).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### NewRobot

Create a new robot.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

**Parameters:**

- `name` [(string)](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#text-sequence-type-str): Name of the new robot.

> - `location_id` [(Optional[string])](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#text-sequence-type-str): ID of the location under which to create the new robot.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `location_id` [(Optional[string])](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#text-sequence-type-str): ID of the location to create the new robot in.
``` 
(opt) Wording is a bit confusing

Author: I was trying to not commit the grammar faux pas of ending a sentence with a preposition, but maybe bending the rules is better for most readers here

  Defaults to the current authorized location.

**Raises:**

> - GRPCError: An error is raised if an invalid location ID is passed or one isn't passed and no location ID was provided at `AppClient` instantiation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- GRPCError: The error raised if an invalid location ID was passed or no location ID was passed, therefore provided, at `AppClient` instantiation.
```
This sentence is super confusing-- would clean up a little bit and change tense, otherwise exact woridng opt!

Author: Yeah; also from Python SDK docs but you're right there should at least be a comma there. I think the following is more correct though if this makes sense to you:
```suggestion
- GRPCError: An error is raised if an invalid location ID is passed, or if one isn't passed and no location ID was provided at `AppClient` instantiation.
```

Author: Oooh I see now. I just edited my suggestion; do you think that makes sense now?

Reviewer 3: Yep!

## API

The cloud API supports the following methods (among [others](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/app_client/index.html#viam.app.app_client.AppClient)):

{{< readfile "/static/include/services/apis/cloud.md" >}}

### ListOrganizations

List the organizations the user is an authorized user of.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

**Parameters:**

- None

**Returns:**

- [(List[viam.proto.app.Organization])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.Organization): A list of the organization or organizations of which the user is an authorized owner.

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
org_list = await cloud.list_organizations()
```

For more information, see the [Python SDK Docs](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/app_client/index.html#viam.app.app_client.AppClient.list_organizations).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### ListOrganizationMembers

List the members and invites of the organization that you are currently authenticated to.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

**Parameters:**

- None

**Returns:**

> - [(Tuple[List[viam.proto.app.OrganizationMember]])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.OrganizationMember): A tuple containing to lists:

Reviewer 5: The listed return type seems like a tuple with a single element, but there should be two lists. Also small typo!

```suggestion
- [(Tuple[List[viam.proto.app.OrganizationMember]])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.OrganizationMember): A tuple containing two lists:
```

Author: ```suggestion
- (Tuple[List[[viam.proto.app.OrganizationMember]](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.OrganizationMember)], List[[viam.proto.app.OrganizationInvite]](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.OrganizationInvite)): A tuple containing two lists:
```

  - The first (`[0]`) is a list of organization members.
  - The second (`[1]`) is a list of organization invites.

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

> member_list = await cloud.list_organization_members()

Author: ```suggestion
member_list, invite_list = await cloud.list_organization_members()
```

Namespaces can only contain lowercase alphanumeric and dash characters.

**Raises:**

- `GRPCError`: This error is raised if an invalid namespace (for example, `""`) is provided.

**Returns:**

- [(bool)](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#bltin-boolean-values): `True` if the provided namespace is available.

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
available = await cloud.get_organization_namespace_availability(public_namespace="my-cool-organization")
```

For more information, see the [Python SDK Docs](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/app_client/index.html#viam.app.app_client.AppClient.get_organization_namespace_availability).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### UpdateOrganizationInviteAuthorizations

Update (add or remove) the authorizations attached to an organization invite that has already been created.
If an invitation has only one authorization and you want to remove it, delete the invitation instead of using this method.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

**Parameters:**

- `email` [(string)](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#text-sequence-type-str): Email of the user the invite was sent to.

> - `add_authorization` [(Optional[List[viam.proto.app.Authorization]])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.Authorization): Optional list of authorizations to add to the invite.

Author: ```suggestion
- `add_authorizations` [(Optional[List[viam.proto.app.Authorization]])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.Authorization): Optional list of authorizations to add to the invite.
```

> - `remove_authorization` [(Optional[List[viam.proto.app.Authorization]])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.Authorization): Optional list of authorizations to remove from the invite.

Author: ```suggestion
- `remove_authorizations` [(Optional[List[viam.proto.app.Authorization]])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.Authorization): Optional list of authorizations to remove from the invite.
```

**Raises:**

- `GRPCError`: This error is raised if no authorizations are passed or if an invalid combination of authorizations is passed (for example, an authorization to remove when the invite only contains one authorization).

**Returns:**

- [(OrganizationInvite)](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.OrganizationInvite): The updated invitation.

> ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

Author: ```suggestion
```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
from viam.proto.app import Authorization
```

update_invite = await cloud.update_organization_invite_authorizations(
    email="notarealemail@viam.com",

>     remove_authorization=[

Author: ```suggestion
    remove_authorization=Authorization(
```

        authorization_type="some type of auth",
        authorization_id="identifier",
        resource_type="abc",
        resource_id="resource-identifier123",
        identity_id="id12345",
        organization_id="org_id_123"

>     ]

Author: ```suggestion
    )
```

> update_invite = await cloud.update_organization_invite_authorizations(
>     email="notarealemail@viam.com",
>     remove_authorization=[
>         authorization_type="some type of auth",
>         authorization_id="identifier",
>         resource_type="abc",
>         resource_id="resource-identifier123",
>         identity_id="id12345",
>         organization_id="org_id_123"
>     ]
> )

Author: ```suggestion
authorization_to_add=Authorization(
    authorization_type="some type of auth",
    authorization_id="identifier",
    resource_type="abc",
    resource_id="resource-identifier123",
    identity_id="id12345",
    organization_id="org_id_123"
)

update_invite = await cloud.update_organization_invite_authorizations(
    email="notarealemail@viam.com",
    remove_authorizations=[authorization_to_add]
)
```

        )
    )
    return await ViamClient.create_from_dial_options(dial_options)

async def main():

  # Make a ViamClient
  viam_client = await connect()
  # Instantiate an AppClient called "cloud" to run the cloud app API methods on
  cloud = viam_client.app_client

  viam_client.close()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    asyncio.run(main())
```

Once you have instantiated an `AppClient`, you can run the following [API methods](#api) against the `AppClient` object (named `cloud` in the examples).

## API

The cloud API supports the following methods (among [others](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/app/app_client/index.html#viam.app.app_client.AppClient)):

{{< readfile "/static/include/services/apis/cloud.md" >}}

### ListOrganizations

List the organizations the user is an authorized user of.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

**Parameters:**

- None

**Returns:**

- [(List[viam.proto.app.Organization])](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/proto/app/index.html#viam.proto.app.Organization): A list of the organization or organizations of which the user is an authorized owner.

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

> org_list = await cloud.list_organizations()

Author: ```suggestion
org_list = await cloud.list_organizations()
print(org_list)
```
